                                                 OCCUPATIONAL LICENSING
                                           ASSESSING STATE POLICY AND PRACTICE




                                  Barriers to Work:
  Improving Employment in Licensed Occupations
      for Individuals with Criminal Records
                               BY CHIDI UMEZ, THE COUNCIL OF STATE GOVERNMENTS—JUSTICE CENTER
                                   REBECCA PIRIUS, NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF STATE LEGISLATURES

Approximately 77 million Americans, or one in three adults, have a criminal record. Hav-           What is an occupational
ing a criminal record can make it difficult, or even impossible, for an individual to work in      license?
a given field, especially one that requires an occupational license. In 2014, employment
                                                                                                    An occupational license is a
barriers faced by people with felony convictions—including occupational licensing and
                                                                                                    credential that government—most
other challenges, such as lower levels of education and job skills—were associated with a
                                                                                                    often states—requires a worker
reduction in the overall employment rate. This amounted to a loss of at least 1.7 million
                                                                                                    to hold in certain occupations.
workers from the workforce and a cost of at least $78 billion to the economy.1
                                                                                                    Aspiring workers must meet
While occupational licensing can create hurdles for certain workers, individuals                    state-specific educational,
with criminal records can face additional challenges in finding and maintaining                     training, testing and other
employment—a critical aspect of reducing recidivism. Individuals with criminal records              requirements to practice in a
face many barriers to licensure including both those codified in federal and state law              licensed profession. Occupational
and those found in implicit biases. The National Inventory of Collateral Consequences               licenses are mandatory in the
of Conviction (the NICCC), catalogs over 15,000 provisions of law in both statute and               relevant jurisdiction, intended to
regulatory codes that limit occupational licensing opportunities for individuals with               set professional standards and
criminal records2.                                                                                  ensure safety and quality of work,
                                                                                                    and are time-limited. Violation of
The increase in licensing requirements and the lack of uniformity of these requirements             the terms of the license can result
across occupations can have significant costs to individuals with criminal records, society,        in legal action.
and the economy, in the form of lost hours of labor, higher crime rates, and the lost
potential of the individual.3


                                                                      1                         NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF STATE LEGISLATURES
                Criminal records (national data)                            Incarceration: Communities
                                                                            of color most affected
                                                                                          n African-American males ages 18
                                                                                          to 19: 11.8 times more likely be im-
                                                                                          prisoned than white male same age

                                                                              x11.8

                77,000,000
                Approximate number of American adults
                                                                                          n African-American females:
                                                                                          twice as likely as white
                                                                                          females to be imprisoned
                — 1 in 3—with a criminal record
                Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2016                    x2
                600,000
                Inmates released each year
                                                                                          n Hispanics: 856 per 100,000
                                                                             Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics: Prisoners, 2016



                Demographic and Economic Information
                Research shows that among all individuals with criminal records, communities of color are most impacted
                by incarceration and most put at a disadvantage by their criminal histories when seeking future employ-
                ment. While African-Americans make up only 12.6 percent of the general population, they constitute 27
                percent of all arrests. African-American males between the ages of 18 and 19 are 11.8 times more likely
                to be incarcerated than white men of the same age and African-American females are twice as likely to be
                imprisoned than white females.4

                Impacts of Occupational Licensing
                Licensure laws and regulations that are overly burdensome or restrictive create barriers to economic
                stability for individuals with criminal records. Research has shown that people require a combination
                of family support, community assistance and economic opportunity to stay out of the criminal justice
                system.5 Access to employment is a critical component of this web of support, as a steady job provides
                financial resources and social connections that build motivation.6 However, occupational licensing
                requirements can be among the most difficult barriers faced by people with criminal records seeking to
                enter the workforce.
                For instance, occupational licensing statutes in a number of states have blanket prohibitions on awarding
                licenses to those with a criminal record. Some states’ laws contain an automatic disqualification, which
                prohibits a person with a felony conviction from obtaining an occupational license, regardless of whether
                the offense is directly related to the practice of the occupation or poses a substantive risk to public safety.
                In addition, licensing laws often contain “good-character” or “good moral character” provisions that grant
                licensing boards broad discretion to deny applications due to an applicant’s criminal history, including
                convictions for minor offenses and sometimes arrests that never led to a conviction. Even states that do
                not have these explicit “good character” provisions in their licensing laws may nonetheless have very
                minimal restrictions on the ability of licensing boards to reject a license application based largely on the
                criminal history of an applicant.7
                The costs associated with licensure can also be a barrier for people with criminal records, particularly
                those who were formerly incarcerated. The fees related to training, education, acquisition, and mainte-
                nance of a license are all challenges for the formerly incarcerated, who often have limited income and
                other court-ordered monetary sanctions that further inhibit their economic standing.




NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF STATE LEGISLATURES                              2
Occupational licensing                                        Education
provisions of law
Across the 50 states and federal
system, the National Inventory

                                                                                     40%
of Collateral Consequences of




15,000
Conviction catalogs more than




                                                               n Licensing often requires a minimum level
provisions of law (contained both                              of education (plus additional training).
in statutory and regulatory codes)                             40 percent of ex-offenders do not have a
that limit occupational licensing                              high school degree.
opportunities for individuals with                             Source: Turning Shackles into Bootstraps,
criminal records.                                              Center for the Study of Economic Liberty, 2016




Policy Barriers to Employment
BLANKET BANS
Many state licensing laws include some type of blanket disqualification that include automatic prohibitions
for people with criminal records—particularly for felony convictions that are deemed “violent” or “serious”
offenses. The National Inventory of Collateral Consequences of Conviction, a searchable database of the
collateral consequences in all U.S. jurisdictions, catalogs over 6,000 mandatory occupational licensing con-
sequences for people with criminal records.8 This means that boards have no discretion to grant a license
or forgo imposing a license penalty if an individual has a disqualifying conviction. For many state leaders, a
statute that creates an automatic, lifetime ban against anyone with a “violent” felony or a “sex offense” for
an occupational license may seem reasonable. However, even assuming one’s record is accurate, such cate-
gories and labels can be misleading if licensing boards do not use due diligence to examine the nature of the
offense.9 For example, seeing an “assault” on a person’s criminal record may imply a propensity for violence
but without knowing the circumstances of the offense—such as age, frequency or context—an automatic
denial could unfairly exclude strong applicants.10 In addition, frequently unreliable background checks also
present grave challenges in applying blanket bans in licensing decisions. A report by the U.S. Bureau of Jus-
tice Statistics showed that of the 25.9 million fingerprint records processed by states and territories in 2016,
44 percent were used for criminal justice purposes and 14,623,300 were used and submitted for licensing,
employment and regulatory purposes.11 These fingerprint records may include juvenile records, which may
be confidential, “arrests without disposition” (with no charges or charges with no conviction), expunged or
sealed records, or information that a person acquired due to misidentification or identity theft.

“GOOD MORAL CHARACTER” CLAUSES
While public health and safety dictate that some criminal convictions should disqualify applicants for cer-
tain kinds of jobs, in many cases, a criminal conviction of any kind may be a bar to licensure. Licensing regu-
lations often refer broadly to “good moral character” as a requirement for holding a license, and in practice
this has, in many cases, been interpreted to ban individuals with any criminal record.12 Licensing authorities
in these instances are left to analyze what constitutes “good moral character” without much guidance. This
may lead to a licensing process that lacks transparency, predictability and consistency, making it harder for
workers to determine if their past conviction may be disqualifying13 for a certain profession. People with
criminal records might take on a substantial risk if they invest their time and money to train and meet the
required educational parameters for an occupation, only to be barred in the licensing process.




                                                       3                              NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF STATE LEGISLATURES
                COST

                The impact of the cost of occupational licensing requirements is compounded for people who were
                formerly incarcerated. Individuals and their families experience loss of income during the incarcer-
                ation period and are then faced with a lack of income to support themselves upon release. Many
                formerly incarcerated people struggle with homelessness as a result of their inability to obtain stable
                employment and certain housing restrictions placed on people with criminal records. In Los Angeles
                and San Francisco, for example, between 30 percent and 50 percent of all parolees are homeless.14
                In addition, jurisdictions across the country are increasingly assessing fines and fees, called legal
                financial obligations (LFOs), on people who move through the criminal justice system. These fees
                require them to pay thousands of dollars, with interest, or face incarceration.15 For instance, in 2016,
                on average, people in Washington state were sentenced to LFOs of $1,347.16 These fees may include
                the costs for bench warrants, filings with the clerk, court-appointed attorneys, crime-lab analysis, jury
                fees, and even incarceration costs. Some states also charge for restitution and the cost of collecting
                these debts.
                Looking to gain employment, formerly incarcerated people may decide to invest their time and scarce
                income in pursuing a licensed occupation and potentially find out after completing the requirements
                that they are disqualified due to their criminal record. Although licensing requirements vary by state,
                a person who wants to pursue a career as a licensed barber, for example, may have to pay between
                $70 and $165, have over a year of education and experience, and complete an average of two ex-
                ams.17 Because all 50 states and D.C. require a license to work as a barber,18 moving across state lines
                does not offer relief from these restrictions to licensure in many cases.

                Occupational licensing costs also present a barrier for potential entrepreneurship in licensed occupa-
                tions for people with criminal records. For example, makeup artists, an occupation that is primarily
                entrepreneurial in nature, are licensed in 36 states. According to the Institute for Justice, the average
                cost is $116 in fees, in addition to between three and nine months of education and experience, and
                two exams.19




NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF STATE LEGISLATURES                           4
Policy Options
Occupational licensure requirements can have a range of impacts on individuals with criminal records
and policymakers across the country are considering ways to address those barriers. The policy options
reviewed below focus specifically on those relevant to this population, but it is important to note that
broader reforms can also impact individuals with criminal records. Information on broader tools and
frameworks that can be used to help refine a state’s regulatory approach are outlined in “The State of
Occupational Licensing: Research, State Policies and Trends,” available at www.NCSL.org/stateslicense It
is worth noteing that specific to this population, states’ policies focus on the twin goals of seeking to
encourage rehabilitation of criminal offenders while also protecting public safety.20

Examples of some common state approaches to licensing policy that impact individuals with criminal
records are as follows:

Targeted Approches
RELEVANCY LIMITATIONS

States that favor reform to licensing policies that exclude people with convictions have aimed to “refrain
from categorically excluding individuals with criminal records, and instead exclude those individuals
whose convictions are recent, relevant, and pose a threat to public safety.”21 Prohibiting these “blanket
bans” on occupational licensing for people with criminal records allows licensing entities to consider
each application on its merits and allow qualified applicants to move into the workforce. Proponents
argue that it may also allow people with criminal records the opportunity to explain inconsistencies in
background checks and permit licensing agencies to carefully evaluate information in background checks,
including an arrest that did not lead to a conviction. More states, including New Jersey and Oklahoma, are
being clear and explicit in their licensing policies that in cases of denials or revocations based on a criminal
conviction, the conviction should have a “direct, rational, or reasonable relationship”22 to the duties of the
occupation

•    Example: At least nine states—Arkansas, California, Connecticut, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, New
     York, New Mexico, and Pennsylvania—prevent occupational licensing agencies from considering ar-
     rests that did not lead to convictions.23 In states like New Hampshire, a licensing agency cannot deny
     a license on the basis of a prior conviction, unless the agency has considered the nature of the crime
     and whether there is a direct relationship to the occupation. The agency may also consider factors
     such as the time since the conviction and rehabilitation efforts.24

MODIFICATION OF MORALITY CLAUSES

In order to create more transparency and fairness in the licensing process and provide licensing entities
more guidance in their treatment of criminal records, some states have chosen to remove vague and
broad standards. Examples include “good moral character” and restrictions against “moral turpitude” of-
fenses to provide more clarity on exclusionary convictions. This also allows potential applicants, with the
specified offenses, to be more prudent in selecting occupations where those disqualifications are clear.

•    Example: As part of broader efforts on criminal justice reform, lawmakers in Kentucky disallowed
     licensing boards in the state from requiring that applicants possess vaguely defined “good moral
     character.”25

ESTABLISHMENT OF PRE-QUALIFICATION STANDARDS

Some states have mandated that licensing entities allow people with criminal records to petition the
board for a “pre-qualification” opinion. Pre-qualification allows an applicant to get a determination on
eligibility before going through the licensing application process. In these cases, licensing boards are
required to explicitly list disqualifying offenses and are able to notify applicants if their particular offense
will disqualify them from licensure. This process helps to ensure that people with criminal records can
devote their time and resources into pursuing occupations that will lead to gainful employment.



                                                        5                            NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF STATE LEGISLATURES
                •   Example: In 2018, Arizona enacted legislation giving licensure applicants the authority to seek a
                    predetermination from an agency as to whether the criminal record is a disqualifying offense for an
                    occupational license.26

                CERTIFICATION OF REHABILITATION

                •   Another policy option chosen by some states is to offer people with criminal records the oppor-
                    tunity to secure certificates of rehabilitation or certificates of employability that would open the
                    door to receiving occupational licenses. Although the application of these certificates varies from
                    state to state, they “may be used to provide a way for qualified people with criminal records to
                    demonstrate rehabilitation or a commitment to rehabilitation,”27 and to relieve barriers to jobs
                    and licenses. Certificates of rehabilitation may also be a viable option for states that have yet to
                    adopt comprehensive record closure laws (expungement/sealing) since some are able to “directly
                    limit the application of collateral consequences”28 while not removing information from a per-
                    son’s record or limiting public access.

                •   Example: At least 12 states now make certificates of rehabilitation available through the court
                    system and a few others through administrative agencies. They include California, Colorado, Illi-
                    nois, North Carolina, Maryland, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Rhode Island, Tennessee, Vermont
                    and Washington.29

                As states consider occupational licensing policy options, data collection can also be an important piece
                of the governing language. Collecting applicant demographic data can help identify who is excluded from
                licensed work. Data collection also allows states to understand the effects of the licensing policy and be
                able to identify and address any gaps that may arise. However, a significant limitation to data collection
                is the inability to determine who is not applying for a license due to existing regulations or uncertainty of
                how standards are applied.


                Conclusion
                Recognizing the barriers people with a criminal history face to entering the labor market, state policymak-
                ers across the country are actively addressing the challenges through legislation and executive orders.
                Blanket bans, “good moral character” requirements and licensing fees can all be particularly difficult barri-
                ers for this population to overcome, which may ultimately be restricting a significant portion of workforce
                supply. Through policy options that include ensuring convictions are recent and relevant, the modifica-
                tion of statutory morality clauses and the implementation of pre-qualification standards or certificates
                of rehabilitation, policymakers can reduce unintended barriers to the labor market for individuals with
                criminal records.




NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF STATE LEGISLATURES                             6
Selected Recent Actions in the States
 State   Type              Description                                           Date
  AZ     Legislation,      H.B. 2290—Authorizes use of provisional               05/01/2017—Signed
         enacted           licenses for ex-offenders—valid for not more
                           than one year, as specified by licensing depart-
                           ment.
  AZ     Legislation,      S.B. 1436—Authorizes a person with a crim-            04/11/2018—Signed
         enacted           inal record to seek a predetermination from
                           an agency as to whether the criminal record
                           is a disqualifying offense for an occupational
                           license. Requires a determination—written
                           findings of facts and conclusions of law—by
                           the agency within 90 days. Requires an annual
                           report.
  AZ     Executive Order   Exec. Order No. 3—Directs each regulatory             3/29/2017—Signed
                           board to review all licensing requirements,
                           including whether applicants with criminal
                           records are completely barred from licensing
                           or may be denied a license based on character.
                           Requires boards to report number of appli-
                           cants, in the past five years, denied a license
                           due to character concerns related to criminal
                           history. Exec. Order No. 3
  CT     Legislation,      H.B. 5764—Prohibits state or national criminal        7/6/2017—Signed
         enacted           history checks as a prerequisite to licensure for
                           barbers, hairdresser, cosmeticians.
  DE     Legislation,      S.B. 59—Allows certain boards to grant a waiv-        6/8/11—Signed
         enacted           er of convictions determined to be substantial-
                           ly related to each respective practice. Changes
                           the waiting period from five years after the dis-
                           charge of all sentences to five years from the
                           date of conviction for a felony and Removes
                           the five-year limitation for misdemeanors in its
                           entirety.
  DE     Legislation,      H.B. 97—Relating to cosmetology and barber-           3/8/18—Signed
         enacted           ing. Modifies the impact of criminal history
                           on an applicant’s eligibility for licensure by
                           giving the board discretion to grant waivers
                           for a felony conviction for crimes committed
                           against a person where more than three
                           years have elapsed, and more than two years
                           have elapsed for other felonies. The Board is
                           precluded from considering a conviction where
                           more than 10 years have elapsed since date of
                           conviction.




                                                7                             NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF STATE LEGISLATURES
                  State   Type              Description                                          Date
                   DE     Executive Order   Exec. Order No. 60—Establishes the Delaware          04/20/16—Signed
                                            Professional Licensing Committee to conduct
                                            a comprehensive analysis of all commissions,
                                            boards and agencies, and recommend best
                                            practices to assist the state in meeting “its twin
                                            goals” of encouraging public safety and ensur-
                                            ing residents can enter the occupation of their
                                            choice. The final committee report outlined
                                            recommendations to remove unnecessary
                                            barriers to persons with criminal records.
                   GA     Legislation,      H.B. 328—Provides greater employment                 05/05/2015—Signed
                          enacted           opportunities for individuals who have had
                                            interactions with the criminal justice system.
                   GA     Legislation,      S.B. 367—Requires professional licensing             04/27/2016—Signed
                          enacted           boards to consider certain factors relating to
                                            felonies before denying a license to an ap-
                                            plicant or revoking a license and to provide
                                            for probationary licenses for participants in
                                            accountability courts.
                    IL    Legislation,      S.B. 1688—Comprehensive criminal justice bill.       8/24/2017—Signed
                          enacted           Directs department of professional regulation
                                            to publish an annual report showing number
                                            of applicants for new licenses, number with
                                            a criminal conviction, number of applications
                                            granted and denied, and number granted and
                                            denied with criminal history record.
                   IN     Legislation,      H.B. 1245—Allows applicants to seek a deter-         03/21/2018—Signed
                          enacted           mination, before going through the application
                                            process, as to whether the individual’s prior
                                            conviction will disqualify the individual from
                                            receiving the license or certification.




NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF STATE LEGISLATURES                        8
State   Type              Description                                              Date
 KY     Legislation,      S.B. 120—Affords an applicant an opportunity             04/10/2017—Signed
        enacted           to be heard before the board denies a license
                          based on a criminal conviction. Repealed sec-
                          tion 335B.040, which allowed denial of license
                          on ground of absence of good moral character.
 MI     Legislation,      H.B. 5216—Requires Department of Correc-                 12/16/2014—Signed
        enacted           tions to issue a “Certificate of Employability”
                          if an inmate meets all of the statutory require-
                          ments.
OH      Legislation,      S.B. 337—Defines crimes that constitute a                6/26/2012—Signed
        enacted           “crimes of moral turpitude” for occupational
                          licensing purposes.
 NC     Legislation,      H.B. 641—Provides that a Certificate of Relief           6/23/2011—Signed
        enacted           (issued to an offender as partial relief to collat-
                          eral sanctions based on a prior conviction) is
                          a bar to any action alleging lack of due care in
                          licensing.
 PA     Executive Order   Exec. Order No. 3 --Directs the Commissioner             ​10/24/2017—Signed
                          of Professional & Occupational Affairs to work
                          with regulatory boards to undertake a critical
                          and comprehensive review of all licensing
                          requirements and submit a report. Requires
                          the report to include information on the use of
                          criminal history bans on licensure in the State
                          and in regional states.
WY      Legislation,      S.B. 42—Provides immunity from civil liability           3/14/18—Signed
        enacted           for licensing boards acting in accordance with
                          statutory requirements on considering criminal
                          convictions.




                                                9                               NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF STATE LEGISLATURES
      Notes
      1.   Dick M. Carpenter II et al., License to Work: A National Study of Burdens from Occupational Licensing (2nd Edition) (Arlington, Va.: Institute for
           Justice, November 2017).
      2.   Council of State Governments Justice Center, “National Inventory of Collateral Consequences of Conviction” (New York, N.Y.: CSG, n.d.) https://
           niccc.csgjusticecenter.org/.
      3.   Stephen Slivinski, “Turning Shackles into Bootstraps: Why Occupational Licensing Reform Is the Missing Piece of Criminal Justice Reform”
           (Tempe, Ariz.: Center for the Study of Economic Liberty at Arizona State University, Nov. 7, 2016).
      4.   U.S. Department of Justice, Prisoners in 2016 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice
           Statistics, January 2018).
      5.   National Employment Law Project (NELP), “Research Supports Fair Chance Policies” (New York, N.Y.: NELP, April 2015).
      6.   National Reentry Resource Center, “The Consideration of Criminal Records in Occupational Licensing” (New York, N.Y.: NRRC, December 2015).
      7.   Slivinski, “Turning Shackles into Bootstraps: Why Occupational Licensing Reform Is the Missing Piece of Criminal Justice Reform.”.
      8.   Council of State Governments Justice Center, “National Inventory of Collateral Consequences of Conviction.”
      9.   Michelle Navidad Rodriguez and Beth Avery, “Unlicensed & Untapped: Removing Barriers to State Occupational Licenses for People with
           Records” (New York, N.Y.: National Employment Law Project, April 2016).
      10. Ibid.
      11. Becki R. Goggins and Dennis A. DeBacco, “Survey of State Criminal History Information Systems” (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Juc-
          tice, February 2018).
      12. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Occupational Licensing: A Framework for Policymakers (Washington, D.C.: Department of the Treasury Office
          of Economic Policy, the Council of Economic Advisers, and the Department of Labor, July 2015).
      13. Rodriguez, “Unlicensed & Untapped: Removing Barriers to State Occupational Licenses for People with Records.”
      14. California State Department of Corrections, Preventing Parolee Failure Program: An Evaluation (Sacramento, Calif.: California State Depart-
          ment of Corrections, 1997), https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/Digitization/180542NCJRS.pdf.
      15. Alexes Harris, A Pound of Flesh: Monetary Sanctions as Punishment for the Poor (New York, N.Y.: Russell Sage, 2016).
      16. Alana Semuels, “The Fines and Fees That Keep Former Prisoners Poor,” The Atlantic (July 5, 2016).
      17. Carpenter, License to Work: A National Study of Burdens from Occupational Licensing.
      18. Ibid.
      19. Emily Fetsch, “No Bars: Unlocking the Economic Power of The Formerly Incarcerated” (Topeka, Kan.: Kansas Center for Economic Growth,
          November 2016).
      20. Haw. Rev. Stat. § 831-3.1; Tenn. Code § 40-29-107.
      21. Fetsch, “No Bars: Unlocking the Economic Power of The Formerly Incarcerated.”
      22. Center for the Study of Social Policy, “Remove Barriers to Employment for Ex-Offenders” (Washington, D.C.: Center for the Study for Social
          Policy, n,d,).
      23. Ark. Code § 17-1-103; Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 480; Conn. Gen. Stat. sec. § 46a-80; Ill. Pub. Act 100-286 (eff. 1/1/18); Ind. Code §§25-1-1.1-6;
          36-1-26 (effective 11/1/18); Mich. Comp. Laws § 338.43; N.M. Stat. § 28-2-3; N.Y. Exec. Law § 296 (16); 18 Pa. Cons. Stat. § 9124.
      24. N.H. Stat. § 332G:10.
      25. Kentucky 2017 Senate Bill 120.
      26. Arizona 2018 Senate Bill 1436.
      27. Legal Action Center, “Advocacy Toolkit—Certificates of Rehabilitation” (New York, N.Y.: Legal Action Center, n.d.).
      28. Margaret Love, Josh Gaines, and Jenny Osborne, Forgiving and Forgetting in American Justice: A 50-State Guide to Expungement and Resto-
          ration of Rights, (n.p.: Collateral Consequences Resource Center, April 2018), 15; http://ccresourcecenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/
          Forgiving-Forgetting-CCRC-Apr-2018.pdf.
      29. Ibid.




NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF STATE LEGISLATURES                                    10
                              OCCUPATIONAL LICENSING: BARRIERS TO WORK SERIES

This series of four publications is part of the Occupational Licensing: Assessing State Policy and Research
Project. These documents focus on the unique challenges and barriers specific to four population groups
  when they wish to enter a licensed occupation and practice a licensed occupation across state lines.
Each report outlines specific state policy options to address the unique challenges faced by the individual
                                                 population.

                                                  Overview of Occupational Licensing

  Occupational licensure is a form of government regulation that requires a worker to hold a credential
  to practice or operate in a certain occupation. To receive an occupational license, applicants are often
 required to meet specific criteria in the form of education or training, fees, and testing. Licensing boards
 generally granted the authority to establish these requirements and are the final arbiter of market entry
for a licensed occupation. These boards are usually comprised of a combination of industry professionals
                                              and state officials.

Licensed workers now comprise nearly 25 percent of all employed Americans. States vary not only in the
share of workers with a license, but also in the requirements to obtain a license in the state. While licens-
ing laws were created with the intent of protecting public health and safety, research suggests that some
      licensing can have negative consequences for job growth, employment and consumer prices.

           Licensing regulations have created unique barriers and challenges for certain populations
          who are entering the labor market or moving across states lines. This Barriers to Work series
                      focuses on the specific barriers for four different population groups:

                                              •      Immigrants with work authorization

                                              •      Individuals with criminal records

                                              •      Long-term unemployed persons

                                              •      Veterans and military spouses



    Occupational Licensing Learning Consortium

    In 2017, the U.S. Department of Labor’s Employment and Training Administration awarded the Na-
    tional Conference of State Legislatures, in partnership with The Council of State Governments and
    the National Governors Association Center for Best Practices, funding on a three-year project to:
    1) ensure that existing and new licensing requirements are not overly broad or burdensome and
    don’t create unnecessary barriers to labor market entry; and 2) improve the portability for selected
    occupational licenses across state lines. The national partners are producing research, including
    these reports, convening state policymakers and experts in the field of occupational licensing, and
    delivering technical assistance to states. Through a competitive application process, 11 states were
    selected to participate in the consortium. Those 11 states are: Arkansas, Colorado, Connecticut,
    Delaware, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, Nevada, Utah and Wisconsin.




These workforce products are funded by a grant awarded by the U.S. Department of Labor’s Employment and Training Administration. The products
are created by the National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL) and do not necessarily reflect the official position of the U.S. Department of Labor.
The Department of Labor makes no guarantees, warranties, or assurances of any kind, express or implied, with respect to such information, including
any information on linked sites and including, but not limited to, accuracy of the information or its completeness, timeliness, usefulness, adequacy,
continued availability, or ownership. These products are copyrighted by NCSL.
                                                              NCSL Contact:
                                                           Luke Martel
                                                          Group Director
                                              Employment, Labor & Retirement Program
                                                          303-856-1470
                                                      Luke.Martel@ncsl.org




                                      NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF STATE LEGISLATURES


                                                  William T. Pound, Executive Director
7700 East First Place, Denver, Colorado 80230, 303-364-7700 | 444 North Capitol Street, N.W., Suite 515, Washington, D.C. 20001, 202-624-5400
                                                               www.ncsl.org
                    © 2018 by the National Conference of State Legislatures. All rights reserved. ISBN 978-1-58024-952-2
